Bubble City: Chapter 3
======================

November 3, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity3)

* * * * *

The next day was a Saturday but by the following Monday things had
calmed down and Jason could finally begin real work.

He began, as he always did, by trying to figure out the system. You
couldn’t really work on something until you really *grokked* it:
understood all the pieces and how they interacted and why they were
there. If you didn’t get that, then you could spend days trying to fix
one piece, only to discover all your effort was wasted because your
fixes would be ineffective as long as another part was in place.

He first checked out a copy of the code, staring at the list of
thousands of files on his screen, trying to figure out where to start.
As usual, nobody had bothered to write down anything explaining things.
So he began opening pieces up, finding that they referenced other
sections and bouncing from section to section until the big picture
became clearer.

By the end of the day, he felt he had a pretty solid understanding of
how the whole thing worked. Not how people *thought* it worked, but how
it actually did — what the code that actually ran the system said.

* * * * *

“What the hell were they thinking?” Sarah thought, as she sat staring at
yet another of the braindead interfaces the programmers had come up
with. She knew they had no contact with other humans but honestly
sometimes she didn’t understand why they couldn’t even figure out basic
principles of decent design.

She started, as she always did, by trying to figure out the system. She
looked at the various pieces of the interface and tried to figure out
the different concepts they were manipulating. Programmers always
thought of it in terms of how the system was built, but the users had no
idea how the system was built and couldn’t cares.

You had to think of it from their perspective: what was it they wanted
to do, what were the things they encountered along the way, and how
could you make sure they felt like they were in control of those things?

And then, once you figured all that out, how did you beat it through the
heads of the programmers?

* * * * *

Trent’s calendar warned him of an impending VC meeting. Running an
office like this — servers, employees, big looming screens overhead —
wasn’t cheap. And since the site didn’t run ads or have a revenue
stream, the only way to keep the lights on was to trot back to the VCs
every six months with some impressive charts and some pleas for cash.

He looked through the names of the people he was meeting with and then
jumped over to scan their blogs. To pitch to people you really had to
understand them. Figure out what made them tick. Everyone required a
different pitch and Trent knew exactly how to reshape it for them, just
as Newsflip reshaped a series of links to meet the reader’s desires.

He remembered what companies they’d previously invested on, which ones
had done well, what they’d mentioned their kids were into, what gadgets
they enjoyed, and — most importantly — how Trent had cut them favors in
the past. This town ran on that sort of thing.

* * * * *

High above the Newsflip offices loomed a series of big screens with a
rapidly-scrolling list of links. The lists were generated by a series of
crawlers which ran, 24/7, around various weblogs and social bookmarking
sites. Every time someone posted a new link to their blog, or bookmarked
something on del.icio.us, or voted for it on Digg, it saw it and noted
it. Then another program took these triples (jon, del.icio.us
bookmarked, lessig.org) and scoured them for patterns. Were a group of
people all bookmarking lessig.org today? Are a dozen blogs all linking
to a particular YouTube video?

It then used these patterns to cluster users into groups. Jon, Jim, and
Jill all like YouTube videos about cats. Sal, Sue, and Sam all like
newspaper articles about copyright.

And that way, when it saw a new YouTube video about cats, or a new
newspaper article about copyright, it could make a guess at who would
like it. And that combination of guesses made up the Newsflip front
page.

When you visited Newsflip for the first time, it’d show you a bunch of
things that were widely liked by different groups of people. Maybe the
top link today about music and sports and technology and business. And
when you clicked the one you liked the most — let’s say music — it’d
show you ten more stories from the various subgroups of music. In just a
couple clicks — music, pop, indie, guitar-based — it’d have you figured
out and know a great deal more about which kind of links to send your
way.

From then on, every time you visited the site it would use this
knowledge to send you links it thought you might like. It would also
show you a few random popular links as well, just to make sure it wasn’t
missing out on any other odd tastes you had. So every time you visited
Newsflip it served you up a couple dozen stories it thought that you
would like. (Of course, it also noted down which stories you clicked on
and said you liked, right along with the links and bookmarks.)

At the heart of it was the pattern-finding system that noticed when
groups of people seemed to be doing something. It was based on a system
called Notated News Analysis (NNA) which had been invented ages ago by
some old guy who turned it into a public standard. Now dozens of sites,
including Newsflip, used it to try to generate the best recommendations
about what to see on the Internet.

* * * * *

Samuel scrolled through his notes one last time before the meeting. Soon
people would be filing into the conference room and he couldn’t afford
to seem unprepared in front of them. He visualized himself standing in
front of the room, walking through the bullet points, smoothly ordering
the meeting, parrying questions, parceling out action items, dodging
barbs. He was ready.

People filed in, pulled out their laptops, and engaged in the
pre-meeting chit-chat; the final moment of levity before the meeting’s
dreadfully boring waste of time. Finally, he tapped on the table for
order.

“Hey everyone, welcome back to the monday morning evangelism team
coordination meeting. As usual, we’ll go around the table and have each
team bring us up to date on their activities. I’ll start.”

“So this week I gave a keynote at OSCON and encouraged developers to use
Google Platform to host their apps. My main points were: 1) that this
was a new era of openness here at Google, where we were handing control
of our computers to the community; 2) that we had by far the most
powerful and scalable system for deployment; and 3) that we were always
on the lookout for the developers of the next hot application and that
users of Google Platform would be fast-tracked with the acquisition
team.”

“Alright, HR?”

“So this week we did a booth at the Ubuntu conference. These things
continue to be an amazing value for us. The booth costs a pittance, we
managed to snag four top developers out of it (gave them the usual
bullshit about the Goog’s commitment to open source), and we lined them
up in job slots that are definitely going to take them out of the open
source world for a while.”

“Great work! Standards?”

“Well, the big news continues to be NNA. Newsflip, a small startup up in
San Francisco, was trying to switch away from it but, of all things,
*Wayne Darnus* turned the firehose on them and managed to talk them out
of it. So now—”

“Wait, Wayne Darnus?” “Yup!” “What’s his angle?” “Well, you know, he
says he invented NNA so anything that takes attention away from it just
makes him less important.” Samuel broke out laughing. “Oh god, that’s
perfect. So what did he do?” “Oh, you know, the usual. Did a piece on
how he was oh-so-concerned about all the poor users who would be hurt by
the switch.” Samuel couldn’t stop giggling. “Oh my god,” he said. “This
is just too perfect.” “Yeah, the guy’s basically doing our job for us.”

“Yeah, exactly. Hey, that gives me an idea. Do you have Wayne’s number?”
“His phone number?” “Yeah.” “Uh, sure, I’ve got it here somewhere. OK,
510-555-2414.” Samuel picked up the phone and dialed it, repeating the
numbers back as he did. He made a shushing sound and set it on
speakerphone.

“Hello?” came the gruff voice at the other end. “Wayne! Good to hear
you. Hey, this is Samuel Boxton over at Google Evangelism.” “Google?
Hey, I didn’t say *anything* about Google on today’s show. That stuff I
said wasn’t targeted you at all.”

“No, no, Wayne, I’m not calling to *complain*; I’m calling to
*congratulate*.” “Congratulate? Congratulate what?” “Congratulate *you*,
silly. On the great job you did with Newsflip. That was a real act of
generous diplomacy you did there.” “Oh, uh, well, I guess it was.
Thanks. But why does Google care about something like that?”

“Don’t be silly, Wayne. At Google we’re just like you — looking out for
the users. Trying to make the best Web experience for everyone. We’re
really 100% on the same page there.” “Um, yeah then, I suppose we are.”
“You know, it’s a shame that we’ve never managed to collaborate before.
Our interests are so aligned that it would really be great if we could
figure out some way to work together.” “What do you mean? Do you have
some kind of joint project in mind?”

“No, not exactly, Wayne. I was thinking more some kind of funding
arrangement.” “Funding arrangement,” Wayne repeated. “Yes. Now hear me
out: what if we funded The Wayne Darnus Center for User Priorities?”
“The Wayne Darnus Center for User Priorities. I like the sound of that.”
“I thought you would. Now we’ll give you a startup grant to help you
establish and operate the center, which will keep on doing the good work
you’re doing to promote NNA.” “Um, OK.” “To start with, I was thinking
of an initial grant of around three million dollars.” Wayne coughed
suddenly but soon regained his composure. “Um, yes, well, I think that
should be able to cover our initial operations.”

“Perfect. There’s just one more catch.” “Oh,” Wayne said, his voice
falling a bit. “What?” “Well, here at Google we don’t want to make a big
show about how we’re helping the Web. So it’s essential our donation
remain anonymous.” “Anonymous?” “Yeah, you know how whenever you go to a
museum or something like that it always says ‘Generous donations by
anonymous’? That’s just how it works in philanthropy.” “Oh, I see,”
Wayne said.

“So we’ll be doing it exactly like that. The actual money will be
donated to you by a shell corporation called Rinaldi Tile, Inc. which we
use for these kinds of special projects and we’ll have you sign a
confidentiality agreement prohibiting you from disclosing the real
source. You know, all the usual stuff.” “Uh huh,” Wayne said, a bit
skeptically. “And then we’ll send you the three million dollars.”
“Sounds great!” Wayne said quickly “Where do I sign?” “I’ll have my
assistant send over the papers in just a little bit.” “Perfect.” “Been a
pleasure working with you. See you later.” “Bye.”

Samuel hung up the phone and saw smiling faces around the conference
table. He smiled back and got up to take a mock bow. The room applauded.

*Tomorrow:* [Chapter Four](http://aaronsw.com/weblog/bubblecity4)
