Berlin
======

January 30, 2007

[Original link](http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/23c3)

* * * * *

A giant death star-like ball hovers over Berlin’s Alexanderplatz, a
remnant of the Cold War struggle to seem powerful. Its lit from
underneath, casting it an ominous glow, just the kind of comically-evil
thing you’d see in a bad movie.

Just across the way is a childlike spaceship standing in front of a
glowing dome and inside — well, inside, as a person at the desk put it
in their thick German accent, “everything is a little bit chaos”.

The Chaos Communications Congress has taken over the building. The dome
on the top floor is filled an ongoing series of interesting talks, the
lounge underneath it is filled with couches and rugs and rocking music
for people to hang out, and the floor beneath that is filled with people
in front of monitors watching the warm glow of computer code scroll by.
The place is filled with hackers.

I don’t particularly like computers, but there’s a definite charm to
these people’s cast of mind. They like to get stuff done. There are
tables with soldering irons and pliers and lego blocks and cubes of
blinking lights and animation software and magnifying glasses and more.
One group has built little blinking tags that figure out which room
you’re in and report it to a central server. Another has shown everyone
how to purchase VOIP phones from the electronics store across the
street, hook them up to a conference network they’ve built, and then
return them when the conference is over. Others are showing off the
stuff they’ve built, from software that can let you surf the Internet
completely anonymously to laptops that can be distributed to the Third
World for \$100 a pop.

For these people, there’s no separation between work and fun. It’s not
like other conferences where you sit during the day in quiet seats
taking notes on carefully preselected talks and then spend the nights
out drinking with your buddies. You can spend the days drinking and the
nights listening to talks, each blending into each other, with games and
working and gabbing on the side. Couches next to lectures, couches in
lectures, lectures from couches.

Even if you don’t like the subject matter, you have to admire the
atmosphere. What other group has a place like this, existing somewhere
between occupation and hobby and subculture, between conference and
convention and hangout? It’s fun, it’s educational; it’s occupation,
it’s friendship; it’s building, it’s destroying. It is, indeed, a little
bit chaos.
